chapters/appendix.adoc, before:

[appendix]
== Terminology
=== Ball Manipulation
Shooting and <<Dribbling Device, dribbling>> is considered as manipulating the ball, the ball accidentally bouncing off the hull is not.


[appendix]
== Game Event Table
The game event table is a compilation of the different game events and their consequences. It also lists what all <<Automatic Referee>> implementations must be capable of handling.

NOTE: Note that the information shown in this table here is incomplete. Please read the sections of the respective events for the full definitions.

=== Events For Match Proceeding
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| Prepared | during <<Kick-Off>>, <<Penalty Kick>> | <<Normal Start>> | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement>> failed by team in favor | during <<Ball Placement>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> (div A) / previous command (div B) | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement>> failed by opponent | during <<Ball Placement>> | <<Stop>> | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement>> successful | during <<Ball Placement>> | continue | auto referee
| <<Robot Substitution>> Intent | always | <<Halt>> (after next stoppage), then <<Stop>> | game controller
| <<Number Of Robots>> exceeded | always | <<Stop>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Ball Leaving The Field
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| <<Throw-In>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Goal Kick>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Corner Kick>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<aimless-kick, Aimless Kick>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Scoring Goals
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| <<Scoring Goals, Goal>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Kick-Off>> | (auto referee) footnote:[the game controller operator has to continue the game]
| <<Scoring Goals, Invalid Goal>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Offenses
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| <<No Progress In Game>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Force Start>> | auto referee
| <<Double Touch>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Unsporting Behavior>> | always | <<Stop>> -> <<Yellow Card>>, <<Red Card>>, <<Penalty Kick>>, <<Forced Forfeit>> or <<Disqualification>> | referee -> game controller
| Multiple <<Fouls>> | always | <<Yellow Card>> | game controller
| Multiple <<Yellow Card, Yellow Cards>> | always | <<Red Card>> | game controller
|===


=== Events For Stopping Fouls
All <<Stopping Fouls>> result in:

* Incrementing the foul counter (except for <<Multiple Defenders>>).

|===
| Event | Applicability | Action | Handled By

| <<Robot Too Close To Opponent Defense Area>> | during <<Stop>> and <<Free Kick>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Pushing>> | always | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | referee -> game controller
| <<Ball Holding>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | referee -> game controller
| <<Tipping Over Or Dropping Parts>> | always | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | referee -> game controller
| <<Multiple Defenders>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Penalty Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Boundary Crossing>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Keeper Held Ball>> in <<Defense Area, defense area>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Excessive Dribbling>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Non Stopping Fouls
All <<Non Stopping Fouls>> result in:

* Incrementing the foul counter.
* Repeated every 2 seconds, if still committed without interruption.

|===
| Event | Applicability | Action | Handled By

| <<Attacker Touched Ball In Opponent Defense Area>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | - | auto referee
| <<Ball Speed>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | - | auto referee
| <<Crashing>> | always | - | auto referee
| <<Crashing>> draw | always | - | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Fouls While Ball Out Of Play
All <<Fouls While Ball Out Of Play>> result in:

* Incrementing the foul counter.
* Repeated every 2 seconds, if still committed.
* Only once per foul, team and 2 seconds.

|===
| Event | Applicability | Action | Handled By

| <<Defender Too Close To Ball>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball out of play>> | - | auto referee
| <<Robot Stop Speed>> | during <<Stop>> | - | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement Interference>> | during <<Ball Placement>> | placement timer increased by 10 seconds | auto referee
|===


[appendix]
== Overview of Timings
|===
| Situation                                                           | Div A Time | Div B Time

| Remove robot for <<Yellow Card>>                                    | 10 s       | 10 s
| <<Penalty Kick, penalty kick>>                                      | 10 s       | 10 s
| <<Kick-Off, kick-off>>                                              | 10 s       | 10 s
| <<Free Kick, free kick>>                                            |  5 s       | 10 s
| <<Keeper Held Ball>> inside <<Defense Area>>                        |  5 s       | 10 s
| <<No Progress In Game>>                                             |  5 s       | 10 s
|===


[appendix]
== Differences Between Divisions

This is a complete list of differences between <<Divisions, division>> A and <<Divisions, division>> B.

* Division A plays on a <<Dimensions, larger field>> with <<Goals, larger goals>> than division B. As a result, the <<Shoot-Out, shoot-out>> is taken from a greater distance as well.
* Division A plays with <<Number Of Robots, more robots>> than division B.
* The automatic <<Ball Placement, ball placement>> procedure is mandatory for division A and optional for division B.
* The <<aimless-kick, aimless kick>> rule only applies to division B.
* Division A has shorter timeouts in some situations

Commit message:

Reset timer on event only for Defender Too Close To Ball
This makes it easier to handle in the autoRefs and GC and should
not make a significant difference in practice.

chapters/appendix.adoc, after:

[appendix]
== Terminology
=== Ball Manipulation
Shooting and <<Dribbling Device, dribbling>> is considered as manipulating the ball, the ball accidentally bouncing off the hull is not.


[appendix]
== Game Event Table
The game event table is a compilation of the different game events and their consequences. It also lists what all <<Automatic Referee>> implementations must be capable of handling.

NOTE: Note that the information shown in this table here is incomplete. Please read the sections of the respective events for the full definitions.

=== Events For Match Proceeding
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| Prepared | during <<Kick-Off>>, <<Penalty Kick>> | <<Normal Start>> | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement>> failed by team in favor | during <<Ball Placement>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> (div A) / previous command (div B) | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement>> failed by opponent | during <<Ball Placement>> | <<Stop>> | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement>> successful | during <<Ball Placement>> | continue | auto referee
| <<Robot Substitution>> Intent | always | <<Halt>> (after next stoppage), then <<Stop>> | game controller
| <<Number Of Robots>> exceeded | always | <<Stop>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Ball Leaving The Field
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| <<Throw-In>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Goal Kick>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Corner Kick>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<aimless-kick, Aimless Kick>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Scoring Goals
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| <<Scoring Goals, Goal>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Kick-Off>> | (auto referee) footnote:[the game controller operator has to continue the game]
| <<Scoring Goals, Invalid Goal>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Offenses
|===
| Event | Applicability | Command | Handled By

| <<No Progress In Game>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Force Start>> | auto referee
| <<Double Touch>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Unsporting Behavior>> | always | <<Stop>> -> <<Yellow Card>>, <<Red Card>>, <<Penalty Kick>>, <<Forced Forfeit>> or <<Disqualification>> | referee -> game controller
| Multiple <<Fouls>> | always | <<Yellow Card>> | game controller
| Multiple <<Yellow Card, Yellow Cards>> | always | <<Red Card>> | game controller
|===


=== Events For Stopping Fouls
All <<Stopping Fouls>> result in:

* Incrementing the foul counter (except for <<Multiple Defenders>>).

|===
| Event | Applicability | Action | Handled By

| <<Robot Too Close To Opponent Defense Area>> | during <<Stop>> and <<Free Kick>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Pushing>> | always | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | referee -> game controller
| <<Ball Holding>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | referee -> game controller
| <<Tipping Over Or Dropping Parts>> | always | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | referee -> game controller
| <<Multiple Defenders>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Penalty Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Boundary Crossing>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Keeper Held Ball>> in <<Defense Area, defense area>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
| <<Excessive Dribbling>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | <<Stop>> -> <<Free Kick>> | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Non Stopping Fouls
All <<Non Stopping Fouls>> result in:

* Incrementing the foul counter.
* Repeated every 2 seconds, if still committed without interruption.

|===
| Event | Applicability | Action | Handled By

| <<Attacker Touched Ball In Opponent Defense Area>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | - | auto referee
| <<Ball Speed>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball in play>> | - | auto referee
| <<Crashing>> | always | - | auto referee
| <<Crashing>> draw | always | - | auto referee
|===


=== Events For Fouls While Ball Out Of Play
All <<Fouls While Ball Out Of Play>> result in:

* Incrementing the foul counter.
* Repeated every 2 seconds, if still committed.
* Only once per foul, team and 2 seconds.

|===
| Event | Applicability | Action | Handled By

| <<Defender Too Close To Ball>> | <<Ball In And Out Of Play, ball out of play>> | timer for bringing the ball into play is reset | auto referee
| <<Robot Stop Speed>> | during <<Stop>> | - | auto referee
| <<Ball Placement Interference>> | during <<Ball Placement>> | placement timer increased by 10 seconds | auto referee
|===


[appendix]
== Overview of Timings
|===
| Situation                                                           | Div A Time | Div B Time

| Remove robot for <<Yellow Card>>                                    | 10 s       | 10 s
| <<Penalty Kick, penalty kick>>                                      | 10 s       | 10 s
| <<Kick-Off, kick-off>>                                              | 10 s       | 10 s
| <<Free Kick, free kick>>                                            |  5 s       | 10 s
| <<Keeper Held Ball>> inside <<Defense Area>>                        |  5 s       | 10 s
| <<No Progress In Game>>                                             |  5 s       | 10 s
|===


[appendix]
== Differences Between Divisions

This is a complete list of differences between <<Divisions, division>> A and <<Divisions, division>> B.

* Division A plays on a <<Dimensions, larger field>> with <<Goals, larger goals>> than division B. As a result, the <<Shoot-Out, shoot-out>> is taken from a greater distance as well.
* Division A plays with <<Number Of Robots, more robots>> than division B.
* The automatic <<Ball Placement, ball placement>> procedure is mandatory for division A and optional for division B.
* The <<aimless-kick, aimless kick>> rule only applies to division B.
* Division A has shorter timeouts in some situations
