chapters/substitution.adoc, before:

== Robot Substitution
.Definition
Robots are substituted by the <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> of the respective team. No other team member is allowed to take robots out or put robots in.

. A <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> who's team is marked for robot substitution performs at least one of the following operations in the given order.
.. Put robots in. The maximum allowed number of robots of the team on the field must not be exceeded.
.. Take robots out. If a robot that is taken out is closer than 1 meter to the intersection of the halfway line with one of the touch lines, another robot can be put in right away. Otherwise the robot handler has to wait until the next substitution opportunity.
. If one of the robots taken out is the keeper, the <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> tells the <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>> the id of the robot that takes over the keeper role.
. The <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> informs the <<Referee, referee>> when done.
. When both teams finished the robot substitution, the <<Referee, referee>> informs the <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>>.
. The <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>> performs a <<Stop, stop>> followed by continuing the game.

.Usage
Robots can be substituted for any reason. There is no limit on the number of substitutions.

A robot substitution intent can be made by:

. A <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> by informing the <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>> who in turn enters the intent into the <<Game Controller, game controller>>.
. A team software by sending a request to the <<Game Controller, game controller>>.
. The <<Game Controller, game controller>> itself if a team exceeds the maximum number of robots (for example after a team receives a <<Yellow Card, yellow>> or <<Red Card, red card>>).

If the game was halted due to a substitution intent by a team, at least one substitution (taking a robot out or putting one in) must be performed by this team. A substitution intent can be revoked unless the game was not already halted for substitution.

If a robot substitution intent for either team is present just before the game would continue after ball placement, the <<Game Controller, game controller>> automatically <<Halt, halts>> the game.

Commit message:

Robot interchange during game play (Both Div) (#9)
From the Rule proposal:

We aim for less stoppages and especially with walls, there will probably be much less chances to interchange robots. We already encourage teams to automatically interchange robots by replacing them at the midline, but the game still had to be stopped and even halted in 2019. This wasted overall game time.

We propose that robots can always be taken in and out from the midline. No need to stop the game. There should not be any action at the midline during the replacement. That could be enforced by requiring that the ball is not near the interchange position.

In 2019, a lot of time was lost in HALT, while teams interchanged their robots.
We want to encourage teams to reduce the number of manual interchanges to a minimum and make use of the automatic interchange to save overall game time.

We propose that manual robot interchange (if the robot is not taken in/out from the midline) always requires a timeout to be taken.
If a team is out of timeouts and still needs to take one robot out, the team is allowed to take the robot out without a timeout, but can not use any remaining timeout time. It can only remove the robot from the field as fast as possible.

Co-authored-by: Nicolai Ommer <nicolai.ommer@gmail.com>

chapters/substitution.adoc, after:

== Robot Substitution
.Definition
Robots are substituted by the <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> of the respective team. No other team member is allowed to take robots out or put robots in.

The <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> should prefer to use long sleeves and colors that won't interfere with the vision system.

Robots can always be substituted during game play without notifying the <<Referee, referee>> if all the following conditions are met:

. The robot is at least partially inside the <<Field Surface, field margin>>.
. The robot is at a distance from the halfway line that must not exceed 1 meter.
. The ball must be at least 2 meters away from the halfway line.

Additionally, robots can be taken out from any position during <<Stopping The Game, game stoppage>> by the <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> using the procedure below:

. The <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> takes robots out.
. The <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> informs the <<Referee, referee>> when done.
. When both teams finished the robot substitution, the <<Referee, referee>> informs the <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>>.
. The <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>> performs a <<Stop, stop>> followed by continuing the game.

The maximum allowed number of robots of the team on the field must not be exceeded at any time.

.Usage
Robots can be substituted for any reason. There is no limit on the number of substitutions.

A robot substitution intent can be made by:

. A <<Robot Handler, robot handler>> by informing the <<Game Controller Operator, game controller operator>> who in turn enters the intent into the <<Game Controller, game controller>>.
. A team software by sending a request to the <<Game Controller, game controller>>.
. The <<Game Controller, game controller>> itself if a team exceeds the maximum number of robots (for example after a team receives a <<Yellow Card, yellow>> or <<Red Card, red card>>).

If the game was halted due to a substitution intent by a team, at least one substitution (taking a robot out or putting one in) must be performed by this team. A substitution intent can be revoked unless the game was not already halted for substitution.

If a robot substitution intent for either team is present just before the game would continue after ball placement, the <<Game Controller, game controller>> automatically <<Halt, halts>> the game.
